README.md, before:

# Kubernetes the hard way with Vagrant and Ansible

This is a port of Kelsey Hightower project called [Kubernetes the hard way](https://github.com/kelseyhightower/kubernetes-the-hard-way), originally created for GCP. The aim of this project is to build a similar setup, but based on well-known product Vagrant. It allows you to build your own Kubernetes cluster for learning purposes without access to any public cloud provides. The only limit is your PC Hardware :)

### Differences with the Kelsey version

* Uses Vagrant instead of GCP as an infrastructure
* Uses CentOS 7 Linux images
* Creates 3 masters and 2 worker nodes

## Prerequisites

* Installed Vagrant (validated on v2.2.4)
* Installed Ansible
* Installed Virtualbox
* Entries in your /etc/hosts

```bash
10.0.0.10 api.k8s.local
10.0.0.20 master1.k8s.local
10.0.0.21 master2.k8s.local
10.0.0.22 master3.k8s.local
10.0.0.30 worker1.k8s.local
10.0.0.31 worker2.k8s.local
```
* Private and public keys used later for ansible

```bash
./ssh_keys.sh

#it will produce keys in main directory:
key
key.pub
```

## How to setup the cluster

Steps described here are based on original ones from tutorial of Kelsey Hightower.

### Steps 01-02

Follow the original ones from:

[1. Prerequisites](https://github.com/kelseyhightower/kubernetes-the-hard-way/blob/master/docs/01-prerequisites.md)

[2. Installing the Client Tools](https://github.com/kelseyhightower/kubernetes-the-hard-way/blob/master/docs/02-client-tools.md)

### Step 03 - Provisioning Compute Resources

In order to provision the required resources, clone this repository and run below command in main directory:

```bash
vagrant up
```

This will provision 6 VM's on your Virtualbox: 3 Masters, 2 Workers and 1 Nginx Load Balander.

### Step 04 - Provisioning a CA and Generating TLS Certificates

Run the **setup_certs.sh** script in **scripts** folder to create all the required certificates. Make sure you run this script from the certs folder.

```bash
cd scripts/
./setup_certs.sh
```

Next copy the produced certificates to master's and worker's nodes. I suggest you to use vagrant-scp plugin.

```bash
vagrant plugin install vagrant-scp
```

Worker instances:

```bash
for instance in worker1 worker2; do
  vagrant scp ca.pem ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp ${instance}-key.pem ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp ${instance}.pem ${instance}:~/
done
```

Master instances:

```bash
for instance in master1 master2 master3; do
  vagrant scp ca.pem ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp ca-key.pem ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp kubernetes-key.pem ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp kubernetes.pem ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp service-account-key.pem ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp service-account.pem ${instance}:~/
done
```

### Step 05 - Generating Kubernetes Configuration Files for Authentication

Run the **setup_kubeconfigs.sh** script in **scripts** folder to create all the required configuration files. Make sure you run this scrip from the kubeconfigs folder

```bash
./setup_kubeconfigs.sh
```

Next copy the produced files to Worker instances:

```bash
for instance in worker1 worker2; do
  vagrant scp ${instance}.kubeconfig ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp kube-proxy.kubeconfig ${instance}:~/
done
```

and Master instances:

```bash
for instance in master1 master2 master3; do
  vagrant scp admin.kubeconfig ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp kube-controller-manager.kubeconfig ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp kube-scheduler.kubeconfig ${instance}:~/
done
```

### Step 6 Generating the Data Encryption Config and Key

Run the **setup_encryption.sh** script in **scripts** folder to create the encryption key and configuration. Make sure you run this scrip from the encryption folder

```bash
./setup_encryption.sh
```

Next copy the produced files to Master instances:

```bash
for instance in master1 master2 master3; do
  vagrant scp encryption-config.yaml ${instance}:~/
done
```

### Step 7 Bootstrapping the etcd Cluster

> **IMPORTANT!** Ansible playbook expects that desired files and certificates created in previous steps are available under **/home/vagrant** folder in nodes. Make sure you successfully completed it, otherwisei, the setup will fail.

Start the ansible playbook to configure the ETCD cluster:

```bash
ansible-playbook ansible/etcd-cluster.yml -i ansible/inventory --key-file key
```

Above command will create ETCD cluster and start it. You can validate the status, by executing below command on one of the master nodes:

```bash
vagrant ssh master1
sudo ETCDCTL_API=3 /usr/local/bin/etcdctl member list \
  --endpoints=https://127.0.0.1:2379 \
  --cacert=/etc/etcd/ca.pem \
  --cert=/etc/etcd/kubernetes.pem \
  --key=/etc/etcd/kubernetes-key.pem
```

It should produce the output similar to one below:

```bash
33d87194523dae28, started, master3, https://10.0.0.22:2380, https://10.0.0.22:2379
49c039455b52a82e, started, master1, https://10.0.0.20:2380, https://10.0.0.20:2379
d39138844daf67cb, started, master2, https://10.0.0.21:2380, https://10.0.0.21:2379
```

### Step 8 Bootstrapping the Kubernetes Control Plane

> **IMPORTANT!** Ansible playbook expects that desired files and certificates created in previous steps are available under **/home/vagrant** folder in nodes. Make sure you successfully completed it.otherwise the setup will fail.

Start the Ansible playbook to configure control plane of Kubernetes cluster:

```bash
ansible-playbook ansible/control-plane.yml -i ansible/inventory --key-file key
```

After few moments, check if the control plane is operational by typping below command:

```bash
vagrant ssh master1
kubectl get componentstatuses --kubeconfig admin.kubeconfig
```

You should get the output similar to one below:

```bash
[vagrant@master1 ~]$ kubectl get componentstatuses --kubeconfig admin.kubeconfig
NAME                 STATUS    MESSAGE             ERROR
scheduler            Healthy   ok
controller-manager   Healthy   ok
etcd-2               Healthy   {"health":"true"}
etcd-1               Healthy   {"health":"true"}
etcd-0               Healthy   {"health":"true"}
```

You can use another test to validate if nginx load balancer is operational:

```bash
curl -k --cacert scripts/ca.pem  http://api.k8s.local:6443/version
{
  "major": "1",
  "minor": "12",
  "gitVersion": "v1.12.0",
  "gitCommit": "0ed33881dc4355495f623c6f22e7dd0b7632b7c0",
  "gitTreeState": "clean",
  "buildDate": "2018-09-27T16:55:41Z",
  "goVersion": "go1.10.4",
  "compiler": "gc",
  "platform": "linux/amd64"
}
```

Commit message:

Bootstrapping the kubernetes worker nodes

README.md, after:

# Kubernetes the hard way with Vagrant and Ansible

This is a port of Kelsey Hightower project called [Kubernetes the hard way](https://github.com/kelseyhightower/kubernetes-the-hard-way), originally created for GCP. The aim of this project is to build a similar setup, but based on well-known product Vagrant. It allows you to build your own Kubernetes cluster for learning purposes without access to any public cloud provides. The only limit is your PC Hardware :)

### Differences with the Kelsey version

* Uses Vagrant instead of GCP as an infrastructure
* Uses CentOS 7 Linux images
* Creates 3 masters and 2 worker nodes

## Prerequisites

* Installed Vagrant (validated on v2.2.4)
* Installed Ansible
* Installed Virtualbox
* Entries in your /etc/hosts

```bash
10.0.0.10 api.k8s.local
10.0.0.20 master1.k8s.local
10.0.0.21 master2.k8s.local
10.0.0.22 master3.k8s.local
10.0.0.30 worker1.k8s.local
10.0.0.31 worker2.k8s.local
```
* Private and public keys used later for ansible

```bash
./ssh_keys.sh

#it will produce keys in main directory:
key
key.pub
```

## How to setup the cluster

Steps described here are based on original ones from tutorial of Kelsey Hightower.

### Steps 01-02

Follow the original ones from:

[1. Prerequisites](https://github.com/kelseyhightower/kubernetes-the-hard-way/blob/master/docs/01-prerequisites.md)

[2. Installing the Client Tools](https://github.com/kelseyhightower/kubernetes-the-hard-way/blob/master/docs/02-client-tools.md)

### Step 03 - Provisioning Compute Resources

In order to provision the required resources, clone this repository and run below command in main directory:

```bash
vagrant up
```

This will provision 6 VM's on your Virtualbox: 3 Masters, 2 Workers and 1 Nginx Load Balander.

### Step 04 - Provisioning a CA and Generating TLS Certificates

Run the **setup_certs.sh** script in **scripts** folder to create all the required certificates. Make sure you run this script from the certs folder.

```bash
cd scripts/
./setup_certs.sh
```

Next copy the produced certificates to master's and worker's nodes. I suggest you to use vagrant-scp plugin.

```bash
vagrant plugin install vagrant-scp
```

Worker instances:

```bash
for instance in worker1 worker2; do
  vagrant scp ca.pem ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp ${instance}-key.pem ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp ${instance}.pem ${instance}:~/
done
```

Master instances:

```bash
for instance in master1 master2 master3; do
  vagrant scp ca.pem ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp ca-key.pem ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp kubernetes-key.pem ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp kubernetes.pem ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp service-account-key.pem ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp service-account.pem ${instance}:~/
done
```

### Step 05 - Generating Kubernetes Configuration Files for Authentication

Run the **setup_kubeconfigs.sh** script in **scripts** folder to create all the required configuration files. Make sure you run this scrip from the kubeconfigs folder

```bash
./setup_kubeconfigs.sh
```

Next copy the produced files to Worker instances:

```bash
for instance in worker1 worker2; do
  vagrant scp ${instance}.kubeconfig ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp kube-proxy.kubeconfig ${instance}:~/
done
```

and Master instances:

```bash
for instance in master1 master2 master3; do
  vagrant scp admin.kubeconfig ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp kube-controller-manager.kubeconfig ${instance}:~/
  vagrant scp kube-scheduler.kubeconfig ${instance}:~/
done
```

### Step 6 Generating the Data Encryption Config and Key

Run the **setup_encryption.sh** script in **scripts** folder to create the encryption key and configuration. Make sure you run this scrip from the encryption folder

```bash
./setup_encryption.sh
```

Next copy the produced files to Master instances:

```bash
for instance in master1 master2 master3; do
  vagrant scp encryption-config.yaml ${instance}:~/
done
```

### Step 7 Bootstrapping the etcd Cluster

> **IMPORTANT!** Ansible playbook expects that desired files and certificates created in previous steps are available under /home/vagrant folder in nodes. Make sure you successfully completed it, otherwise, the setup will fail.

Start the ansible playbook to configure the ETCD cluster:

```bash
ansible-playbook ansible/etcd-cluster.yml -i ansible/inventory --key-file key
```

Above command will create ETCD cluster and start it. You can validate the status, by executing below command on one of the master nodes:

```bash
vagrant ssh master1
sudo ETCDCTL_API=3 /usr/local/bin/etcdctl member list \
  --endpoints=https://127.0.0.1:2379 \
  --cacert=/etc/etcd/ca.pem \
  --cert=/etc/etcd/kubernetes.pem \
  --key=/etc/etcd/kubernetes-key.pem
```

It should produce the output similar to one below:

```bash
33d87194523dae28, started, master3, https://10.0.0.22:2380, https://10.0.0.22:2379
49c039455b52a82e, started, master1, https://10.0.0.20:2380, https://10.0.0.20:2379
d39138844daf67cb, started, master2, https://10.0.0.21:2380, https://10.0.0.21:2379
```

### Step 8 Bootstrapping the Kubernetes Control Plane

> **IMPORTANT!** Ansible playbook expects that desired files and certificates created in previous steps are available under /home/vagrant folder in nodes. Make sure you successfully completed it.otherwise the setup will fail.

Start the Ansible playbook to configure control plane of Kubernetes cluster:

```bash
ansible-playbook ansible/control-plane.yml -i ansible/inventory --key-file key
```

After few moments, check if the control plane is operational by typping below command:

```bash
vagrant ssh master1
kubectl get componentstatuses --kubeconfig admin.kubeconfig
```

You should get the output similar to one below:

```bash
[vagrant@master1 ~]$ kubectl get componentstatuses --kubeconfig admin.kubeconfig
NAME                 STATUS    MESSAGE             ERROR
scheduler            Healthy   ok
controller-manager   Healthy   ok
etcd-2               Healthy   {"health":"true"}
etcd-1               Healthy   {"health":"true"}
etcd-0               Healthy   {"health":"true"}
```

You can use another test to validate if nginx load balancer is operational:

```bash
curl -k --cacert scripts/ca.pem  https://api.k8s.local:6443/version
{
  "major": "1",
  "minor": "12",
  "gitVersion": "v1.12.0",
  "gitCommit": "0ed33881dc4355495f623c6f22e7dd0b7632b7c0",
  "gitTreeState": "clean",
  "buildDate": "2018-09-27T16:55:41Z",
  "goVersion": "go1.10.4",
  "compiler": "gc",
  "platform": "linux/amd64"
}
```

### Step 9 Bootstrapping the Kubernetes Worker Nodes

> **IMPORTANT!** Ansible playbook expects that desired files and certificates created in previous steps are available under /home/vagrant folder in nodes. Make sure you successfully completed it.otherwise the setup will fail.

Start the Ansible playbook to configure worker nodes of Kubernetes cluster:

```bash
ansible-playbook ansible/worker-nodes.yml -i ansible/inventory --key-file key
```

Once finished, run below commands to validate the status of worker nodes:

```bash
vagrant ssh master1
kubectl get nodes --kubeconfig admin.kubeconfig
```

You should get the output similar to the one below:

```bash
[vagrant@master1 ~]$ kubectl get nodes --kubeconfig admin.kubeconfig
NAME      STATUS   ROLES    AGE    VERSION
worker1   Ready    <none>   12m    v1.12.0
worker2   Ready    <none>   107s   v1.12.0
```
